enough hours in their work and uh in
court
there's a big variation across states
and territories as well so
tasmania had a 7.9 unemployment rate so
it's the highest in the country
and uh on the flip side the act always
has the lowest unemployment rate at four
percent
now to break down uh these figures even
further we've got a guest uh from anz
the senior economist
uh catherine birch uh catherine thanks
for joining us
thank you so unemployment dropping to
6.8 percent
90 thousand jobs added uh that seems
like a strong headline result
any surprises when you look at these
latest figures
i think it's really important to to
split it into two parts so
as you've said already david much of the
strength was in victoria
and that's not surprising because this
was the first labor force survey done
following the reopening of hospitality
and retail in the state so we did expect
that strength
but outside victoria we only saw an
employment gain of about 16 000 or 0.2
in the month and but there were mixed
results across
states as well so it's a bit unclear as
to whether we're seeing
um employment growth outside of victoria
starts as slow as we close in
on the pre-pandemic level or whether it
might be
some of the effect of the end of job
keeper for a lot of businesses
starting to show up in the data but we
do have to keep in mind this is
monthly data it can be a bit volatile
and last month we actually saw a gain of
almost 100 000 in employment
outside victoria so it does seem like a
step in the right direction but
could this job market recovery possibly
go any faster
especially if more stimulus is pumped
into the system by the rba and the
government
oh as i said it's likely that we'll
continue to see some solid gains in
victoria
as we see the ongoing effect from the
reopening there
but as we're closing in on pre-pandemic
levels of employment it may be more of a
challenge
um to keep that recovery going i think
one of the
um worrying points from the
most recent labor market data is that
although we
actually saw in november that most of
the employment gain was in full-time
work
um this has been a bit of an anomaly
over the past few months so actually
while part-time employment is back above
its pre-pandemic level
of march uh full-time employment is
still down by about 148 000
and that's not a victoria story that's
we're seeing that
um quite a broad story there so
queensland new south wales and victoria
um all seeing substantially lower
numbers of full-time workers compared
with this time last year
and catherine i got one last question
for you so the treasurer as you know
gave a budget update and the aussie
economy is doing much better than
expected and it seems
iron ore is the key ingredient after all
prices are at a seven and a half year
high due to strong demand from china but
you think our economic recovery is based
on the fact that we're putting all our
eggs in one basket
oh well i think you know the the those
are the two main reasons why we're going
to see or while we're expecting to see
now and the
treasury is expecting to see a smaller
deficit
in 2021 of 198 billion rather than 214
billion so still
very significant but one reason is that
actually we're seeing the labor market
recover more quickly
fewer people relying on on job keeper
um so we have and we have seen activity
in increase more quickly than we're
expecting so we're in a better economic
position
but then we've also as you said we've
got iron ore prices at about 150 us
dollars a ton
at the moment um rather than you know a
much more conservative forecast that the
treasury would have had in there so
um that's going to continue to um
perhaps put some
likelihood that we see an even smaller
deaths that come the end of 2021
given that treasury assumes that we see
iron ore prices
come down to u.s 55 a ton by mid next
year
whereas we think that they're while
they'll come down from their current
highs they um will still be quite a bit
higher than that forecast
particularly given that there's strong
demand from china at the moment given
its stimulus and infrastructure programs
but also still some supply issues from
brazil
well catherine thank you very much for
your insights
thank you so that was uh catherine burch
a senior economist from anz
on the latest job figures so although a
step in the right direction it's still a
rocky volatile road ahead she says
now david how is the market reacting to
the treasurer's mid-year economic update
which looks better than expected
yeah it seems like the market has
reacted very well i mean it was already
doing quite well before
uh the budget update and the job figures
came out but yeah it's now
i can say the market has jumped it's
risen so much in these last few hours
and it's reached a point where basically
we've more than broke even
now as you can see the asx 200 it's up
by
more than one percent and it's higher
than where it was
uh on january the first before the
coronavirus sell-off and it's mainly
being driven by optimism
over covert vaccines sparking an
economic rebound and all that stimulus
in the system
now fortescue metals is up 2.4 percent
uh thanks to strong iron oil prices
and by now pay later stocks are in high
demand with after pay hitting a new
record high again
channel 9 rose sharply after it gave a
stronger than expected update on its
half-year earnings
and coal miners and travel stocks aren't
doing so well
now the australian dollar has risen to
almost 75.9 usc so 60
76 is not far away so this is the
highest it's been all year
and it's hit sitting at a two and a half
year high as the greenback
continues to weaken on bets uh the us
government might pass another stimulus
bill soon
now on the topic of currencies the
digital currency bitcoin has jumped to
almost
22 000 us dollars for the first time
ever
and since the year began the price of
bitcoin has tripled but it's also
incredibly volatile
two years ago it crashed below three and
a half thousand us dollars
but its supporters see it as a safe
haven asset during this global covert
recession
as central banks across the world
continue to pump record amounts of cash
into their economies
now wall street finished trading with
mixed results this morning the nasdaq
rose half a percent hit a new record
high
after the u.s federal reserve repeated
its pledge to keep interest rates near
zero
the s p went up by a tiny fraction while
the dow jones slipped by about 0.2 of a
percent
now the price of gold has risen to 1867
us dollars an announced while oil prices
are at a nine month high
west texas crewed at 47.8 us per barrel
and kirsten that is the latest in
finance news thanks david
germany has smashed its record for
coronavirus deaths in a 24-hour period
as it enters a harder lockdown to curb
surging infections more than 950 people
died in the past day
cases have surged in recent months and a
light lockdown has failed to bring
infections
down shops and schools will now be
closed
and private gatherings will be limited
to two households with a maximum of five
people in the lead
up to christmas the brazilian government
will begin a mass vaccination program
against covert 19 in february the
president
zaire bolsonaro says more than 5 billion
has been allocated to buy millions of
vaccine doses
once health regulators give their
approval to one of the recently launched
vaccines
the move marks a significant change in
mr bolsonaro's stance on the pandemic
which has killed more than 180
000 people in brazil
restrictions in the united kingdom will
be relaxed for five days over christmas
that's despite calls for family
gatherings to be limited
to stop the spread of coronavirus prime
minister boris johnson has called for
people to exercise extreme caution
and to keep social contact low
politicians gave a promise we'd be able
to gather together at christmas
a glimmer of light at a grim time but
along with gifts
new concern about the virus is arriving
in number ten
it's a permission to see friends and
family comes with stern new advice
we're keeping the laws the same but we
all
want to send the same message
a smaller christmas is going to be a
safer christmas and a shorter christmas
is a safer christmas leaders around the
uk have tried to stick to the same
approach there will be some limited
extra freedom
over the festive period in scotland
where soon 80 percent of people will be
living under tougher restrictions
but there'll be no huge knees up for
mother and daughter max and louise
livingston
we come for a really big family so
normally we have a huge christmas
and loads of games lots of drinks lots
of partying
all the kids but this year obviously
it's completely
completely different for us the
christmas relaxation of the rules will
go ahead
but with a similar call for caution i
have to say i hate with every fiber of
my being standing here
trying to regulate how you spend
christmas the reality is that this
christmas simply can't be normal
but we have every reason every reason to
hope that next year's will be much more
normal
the picture's bleaker in wales though
where the law is being tweaked
so that only two not three households
can get together pressure's intense on
the health service
and with the spread of the disease wales
is going back to a limited lockdown
straight after christmas nobody wants to
be ill
at christmas and none of us
want to give this deadly disease
to our closest family or friends
in northern ireland winter illness
conspired with covet
to fill hospitals to bursting last night
leaving ambulances queuing with patients
inside for as long as 12 hours
and that's even before any of the rules
are eased up
no surprise politicians here are telling
people to take care too
be risk aware at all times
remember the situations and activities
that help the virus spread
so keep your distance stop your contacts
with others outside your household or
christmas bubble
the political decisions about christmas
were never designed to create a
free-for-all
but the worsening pattern of the disease
has forced a rebrand
if not a rethink now for the sports news
jarrod coote joins me and jared
australia
is off to a good start against india um
at the adelaide oval
yeah they certainly are good afternoon
to you mitchell stark on fire
at the moment india won the toss and
chose to bat india
he's currently one for 16 australia has
selected joe burns and matthew wade to
open the batting but uh they're bowling
at the moment while cameron green
will also make his day boost we'll have
to wait uh probably a day also to see
that opening combination joining me
to preview the match is abc sports
reporter simon smale
simon thanks for your time mate now what
have you made at the opening 50 minutes
or so of play
yeah thanks jared a fantastic start for
australia mitchell stark
really on fire right from the off
obviously he is dangerous with the pink
ball we've seen that before australia
have more experience with pink ball
cricket than anyone else
in world cricket so he has been
always had a good grounding and he
started superbly
privy sure highly rated youngsters still
21 years old playing just his
fifth test he was bold off an inside
edge to open
australia's accounts and it was just a
brilliant start and
after losing the toss some would say it
wasn't a bad toss to lose
virat kohli the india captain said that
the pitch looked hard and
ready for a good bat but tim payne he
seemed to think that it wouldn't be
a bad way to start the series by having
a bit of a bowl
on a pitch that had a little bit more
grass covering albeit slightly straw
colored
so very interesting stuff now there's a
lot of talk around australia's opening
combination of joe burns
and matthew wade why do you think the
selectors chose to go the way they did
well it's a really interesting jared jo
burns is the incumbent so the
selectors have obviously just chosen to
to stick with him despite his
really woeful run of form this summer in
first class cricket he's not past 11
once and he's got an average
of less than seven matthew wade
that's slightly less clear i think it's
probably the only way he was actually
going to fit into this team
with cameron green being included
slightly further down the order
he's never opened the batting matthew
wade in first class cricket he's done it
a couple of times in limited overs
so it's going to be really interesting
to see how he goes but
we won't be able to see that for at
least possibly another day or so
depending on how well india
go yeah regardless of how the two go
though will pakowski
and dave want to guarantee for the next
test if they're fit do you think
well i think with um matthew wade being
bumped up the order for the first time
it really smacks of the stop gap effort
until
david warner returns and his um
improvement from the groin injury is
improving all the time he should be
ready
and fit to start in the boxing day test
in melbourne
uh i guess we'll have to wait and see
whether or not joe burns manages to keep
his spot a little bit
depend on how big a um run tally he
manages
in this test it's going to be very
difficult batting with a new pink ball
it's
moving around a little bit darting
around in the hands of the australian
seamers and i have no doubt that the
indian team
are going to do likewise so it's going
to be a real tough test
but if he if he performs then he'll be
very hard to dislodge
now we just saw cameron green get his
baggy green
what are you expecting of him and will
he be given the entire summer you think
to prove himself
i can't see them just bringing him in
for one test and then getting rid of him
again he's
such a highly rated youngster everyone
in test cricket every test cricket fan
has a mythical
status attached to the all-rounder
that'll solve every single one of course
england have
that at the moment it'll be very
interesting to see if cameron green can
manage to step up and be the all-rounder
that we all want him to be but all the
early indications
are that he's got a tremendous head on
his shoulders ahead that did cop a knock
so it's great to see that he's managed
to recover from that head knock that he
got in the australia a game
earlier on last week so i can't see them
chopping and changing too much over the
course of this series and i think
they'll give him a long run
now how important do you think it is for
india to win this test in particular
given it's the only test match that
their skipper virat kholi will be
playing all summer before he returns
home for the birth of his first child
well that's right it's always important
to win the first test of the summer
of course we were expecting vertex to be
in brisbane
and australia has such an impressive
record there
you could argue that perhaps there was a
thought process that india didn't want
to have the first test in brisbane
because of australia's impressive record
but then that kind of goes against
everything that a pink ball test and the
day night test
stands for because india simply haven't
had the matches
in a pink ball format they've only
played one game that was against
bangladesh and that ended inside two
days
last year so this is huge for india
to get off to a good start they won
their first test series ever
last two years ago against australia
in 2-1 the score was there they're
really going to have to step
up i think though because as you said
virat kohli this is going to be the
toughest test for india to matin i would
have thought
with the pink ball and veracoli not
being here for the next three
they have to get off to a strong start
simon thanks very much for your time
no problem so yeah great start for the
aussies and just quickly in the
australian open tennis it's been
confirmed to start on february 8th
through to february 21
so that's three weeks later than normal
and the players that are coming out to
australia will be in quarantine for two
weeks but they can train in quarantine
good to have some dates thanks jared
thank you
let's check the weather again with
graham creed what is the latest with the
category five
cyclone in fiji just looking at the
latest satellite picture it now looks as
though the
eye is just reaching the east coast of
vanuatu and this means that that region
is going to be experiencing mean wind
strength in excess of 200 kilometers per
hour so
it is really starting to barrel down on
the
fiji north island at the moment the
south island will still
feel the effects of this system but it
will be
later on this evening that will really
start to see those winds strengthening
on the southern island so it's crossing
over the southern tip
of the north island it is going to bring
significant winds
and very destructive conditions flooding
rain is expected in both the north and
south already there's fairly widespread
reports of flooding across both
islands but we've also got significant
weather across the continent
at the moment so let's start off with
thunderstorms about the east coast
because they are widespread we're seeing
them around parts of melbourne
extending all the way up through new
south wales into the southeastern
and central parts of queensland at the
moment and the key feature with these
thunderstorms
is the potential of flash flooding with
heavy rainfall
we have seen through parts of new south
wales and also southeast queensland
flash flooding in association with
activity already
today but it's not just the east coast
up in the tropics the monsoon trough has
now formed now it is bringing very heavy
rainfall across the peninsula in
queensland
across the northern territory as well
and there's a broad area of severe
weather this is looking at the potential
of damaging winds
normally high tides as well as localized
heavy rainfall
we're also likely to see a low pressure
system forming around the north west to
west of the northern territory and
that's going to maintain some very heavy
falls with flood watches already issued
for the kimberley in western australia
tomorrow we'll still see plenty of
showers through the east possibly severe
in queensland and new south wales
thanks graeme remember you can keep up
to date at news.abc.net.au
and on iview afternoon briefing with
patricia cavellas is next here on abc
news
stay with us
[Music]
[Applause]
for those of you who haven't thrown out
your 2020 bingo cards did you have this
one in a year where everything has been
unexpected
join us to make sense of it all when
boris johnson is on the phone
saying right now i'm sorry to bring this
up we listen to the experts when it
comes to the pandemic but we're not
listening to the experts when it comes
to climate change this is the difficult
thing for women middle age
we have hugged them to look forward to
proud millennial right here
i already grew all this grace i'm just
gonna hang here the drum
tonight at six on abc in eye view
tomorrow on news breakfast sean
mcauliffe will get us into the festive
spirit with the man as hell holiday
special about to hit our screens
and a story of renewal we'll get an
update on wildlife recovery in gippsland
after last summer's devastating
bushfires
join us then
2020 is almost over and what a year it's
been
costa lends a hand to a very special
gardener if i hadn't have had the garden
maybe i wouldn't have lived or a hundred
get crafty this christmas
kids will love making them and it's a
great activity for family and friends
and look at these luscious lockdown
gardens it's just so
rewarding having the ability to watch
life
and nature just grow around you
gardening australia
tomorrow on abc and ivy
the women's national basketball league
[Music]
have reached their end game
watch the 2020 wnbl finals this weekend
on abc and iview when you strip away the
commercialism the cultural
non-inclusiveness of christmas
what are we left with the peter dutton
action figure no
not even a lump of coal no is crap okay
for a christmas special well it works
for carol's my candlelight no
it's the all-inclusive
non-denominational pagan special
satirising conservative values against
inclusivity it's a feast of fun and this
bloke's cooking
all washed out under the shade of a
cooler bar cask
shawn mcauliffe's mad as hell pagan
holiday special sunday 8 30
abc and eye view spiks and specs returns
for a special episode celebrating music
of the 2010s whether you like to shout
geronimo as you swing from the
chandelier or you'd rather shake it off
and get lucky
we've got a show that'll hit you like a
wrecking ball
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
with team captains myth warhurst and
alan bro
see you very soon australia this fix and
specs 2010 special
sunday on abc and eye view
watch your adc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc news and
current affairs programs
head to abc iview and livestream abc
news now
[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to afternoon briefing
i'm patricia carvellis
coming up the treasurer josh freidenberg
joins me but first here are the top
stories we're following today
a testing blitz underway as the number
of covered cases in sydney's northern
beaches grows to five
the treasurer says australia's economy
is recovering faster than expected
but warns the road ahead remains
challenging
and victoria's government rejects calls
to apologize for the sudden lockdown of
public housing towers
after it was found to have breached
human rights the state's ombudsman
is my guest this hour the australian
economy has rebounded faster than
expected with treasury now forecasting
it will grow
in this financial year rather than
shrink the mid-year budget update which
was handed down today
forecast gdp will grow by 0.75 percent
in 2020 2021. that's up from the
forecast in october
in the october budget which predicted
the economy would contract by 1.5
percent
soaring iron oil prices have also helped
reduce the size of the record deficit
down from a forecast 214
billion dollars this financial year to
109 financial year
to 198 billion dollars treasurer josh
freidenberg joined me a little earlier
treasurer welcome nice to be with you
patricia
how much have higher than expected iron
oil prices contributed to this result
well we've seen company tax receipts up
by 3.4 billion dollars
compared to what was forecast at the
budget just 10 weeks ago
and iron oil prices have certainly
contributed to that but in
the economic numbers that we have
presented today we've taken a pretty
prudence assumption when it comes to the
future of iron oil prices right now
they're
around 150 a ton
u.s uh we have assumed that that will
fall to around 55
a ton uh by september of next year and
we've always done that when it comes
to budget forecasts knowing that when it
comes to the sensitivity analysis
the impact of higher iron oil prices it
can be a substantial boost
to the economic bottom line there are
some glaring emissions in today's
figures including the future of
job seeker the unemployment benefit that
extra top-up money as you know
is only available until march what's
going to happen with the future of that
payment treasurer
well as you say the coronavirus
supplement has been extended to march
and it has provided a vital and
important boost
to so many australians who have been
doing it tough
and have been out of work we will
obviously continue to monitor the labor
market but the best thing that we can do
for those people who are on jobseeker
are to get them into work
and one example of the programs that
we've announced
to do exactly that is the job maker
hiring credit
which is focused on young people aged 15
to
34 who have been unemployed
but who do need that additional
incentive to an employer to take them on
and we are providing up to two hundred
dollars a week for an employer
takes one of those workers on and that
can help
reduce the number of people who are on
job seekers there's no doubt that there
are other programs but
according to your own figures out today
it's going to take four years till we
get to pre-corona level
unemployment so a lot of people are
going to be relying on the unemployment
benefit
should they really be living on 40
dollars a day after march
well again we've put in place the
coronavirus supplement which effectively
doubled that safety net
sure but it all ends in march early
stages
we'll continue to monitor the program
but when you said
about the recovery and the unemployment
rate coming back to where we started
uh pre-covert and it will take to mid
2024 to do that
we have seen an economic recovery which
has been faster
than what we saw during the 80s and the
90s recessions
on the numbers presented today um the
unemployment rate will get back to where
it was
within about four years whereas with the
1980s recession it took
six years and with the 1990s recession
it took 10 years so
i'm very hopeful that the labor market
will continue with its current trend of
strengthening
and today we saw the unemployment rate
pk fall down
to point eight percent from seven
percent we saw ninety thousand
uh new jobs being created eighty four
thousand of which
were full time and we saw strong uh
labor market
uh growth in victoria as that stage
that's right but there's
the national economy comes out of their
lockdown
uh treasurer there are still too many
people unemployed and i know you agree
with that
so you say you want to monitor the
situation can you give
my viewers and listeners austere as to
when you'll be able to tell those many
unemployed people what will happen to
them after march
well what i can say to to all those who
are watching your program who are on
jobseeker
is that what we're trying to do is give
them the best possible
opportunity to enter into the workforce
and
whether it's the tax in incentives to
boost economic activity
whether it's the infrastructure roll out
whether it's the job maker hiring credit
whether it's the skills packages sure
well that's what we already know
i don't think it's all designed to boost
the economy i don't mean to be rude but
when will they get a steer about what
that permanent
payment level will be well again
you know that it's been extended uh out
to
the end of march and that's not very far
away
it's only a few months away and but i'm
not about to make
policy pronouncements okay this
afternoon i know you're not planning to
do that
when will we find out that's what i want
to know so when will they get a sense of
security about what will happen
afterwards
again it doesn't matter how many times
you ask me pk
i'm going to um tell you the same thing
which is
the program of the extended coronavirus
supplement
is in place until the end of march we'll
continue to monitor
the labor market but what we have done
today is to provide extra support to
those australians
who are on job seeker but also extra
support to the economy as a whole
to get them into work how worried are
you
that states could start closing borders
again over the outbreak in new south
wales
i am concerned but i think such actions
would be
premature and would be damaging
to the economy because the last time we
saw consumer confidence
fall back was when south australia put
in place
its short lock down and we know that
closed borders
cost jobs the number of cases
in new south wales right now are small
the new south wales health authorities
have proven themselves to be very
capable
at contact tracing and testing and
getting on top of
new outbreaks and that is what
we hope they do this time around and
have no reason to think that they won't
and of course um we have to
live with the virus because only a
vaccine
when fully rolled out across the world
can uh can
can prevent it spread but in the
meantime we need to
encourage people to go about their lives
in a covert safe way
and that means having our borders open
between states
and having people back at work has
tasmania overreacted by closing its
borders to people from sydney
well i don't think anybody uh or any
state should
to move hastily to to close its borders
um i think what we will see from here
on is our new cases across the country
from time to time but it's our ability
to deal with those cases
which is going to really ensure that our
economic recovery maintains the momentum
that we've seen today obviously today's
figures my info it's all
it's all predicated on trying to keep
things open at least internally
what's your message to the premiers
particularly the queensland premier
they've made a decision to keep open to
sydney at this stage
but they could reverse that decision
what's your message
on what kind of economic consequences
there could be if we shut down again
well i had the opportunity to join the
prime minister uh
my fellow treasurers from the other
states and the the premiers and the
chief ministers
just last friday and it was a very
constructive
uh and a very optimistic conversation
about
where the economy was heading and each
of those
leaders knew that the the the economic
recovery very much depended on our
ability
to successfully suppress the virus so no
one
is questioning uh the steps that need to
be taken within states
uh to contact trace and to test but when
it comes to
the overall economy confidence is key
the premiers know that the treasurers
know that and one way to maintain that
confidence
is to keep those borders open and to
allow australians to
freely travel between states do you see
this recovery as evidence
that the economy will be able to afford
stage three of the income tax cuts
well stage three is legislated uh
patricia
and it's passed through the parliament
it's law
and it will come into effect what we
have done
is brought forward stage two
to brought forward by two years as well
as
adding in what is called an additional
year of limito a low middle income tax
offset
that's providing a tax relief for more
than 11.5 million australians tax relief
that's already flowing but when it comes
to stage three what we are doing there
is abolishing a whole tax bracket so
that
um millions of australians pay a
marginal rate of no more
than 30 cents in the dollar and that is
really important so if you were in
between
forty five thousand dollars and two
hundred thousand dollars
you'll pay a marginal rate of no more
than thirty cents in the dollar
and that uh patricia will very much um
help
economic activity across the country but
it will also
reward aspiration and provide reward for
effort
treasury you mentioned that it's already
legislated which is true another thing
that's already legislated
is superannuation increases will you
commit then to keeping
those superannuation increases in place
well if you're talking about the the
rise in the superannuation guarantee
the next scheduled increase is by mid
next year what i have said is that we
will make a decision
on that scheduled increase before that
time and make
our views publicly known we've just had
a retirement income review
which did point out that our retirement
income
system is sustainable it is sound it is
effective
but we also have seen from some quarters
including the reserve bank governor this
retirement income review the grant
institute and others a point that they
made
which is that there is a trade-off
between wages
and the increase in the superannuation
guarantee
and those are issues that the government
will continue to get continue to
consider
and what's your instinct on this you're
obviously forming a view given the time
frame which is again quite touch
are you looking to repeal those
legislated increases
well again i'm not going to make policy
announcements today other than
other than to repeat we are considering
those issues in the context of the
retirement income review which was a
very substantial
body of work by independent experts and
followed extensive consultation with
stakeholders
treasurer have you ruled out the
possibility that china could target
australian iron ore if trade tensions
worsen
well when it comes to the chinese uh
australian trade tensions they're
obvious they're real they're there for
everyone to see and
and they're serious uh we have taken
into account
uh those trade tensions uh in putting
together
um the forecasts announced today that
being said
um australia provides
more than 60 percent of china's iron ore
and it's been critical uh to not only
their steel production for domestic use
but also
for export they're a very large exporter
of steel so it's a job creator
in china and it's been part of their
economic success story which has lifted
hundreds of millions of chinese out of
poverty and our iron ore
is of course um world leading and of
high quality
so they depend on our iron ore uh i
don't know
uh what what next moves that they will
undertake when it comes
to issues of trade but what i do know is
that australia will continue to defend
its national interest we want to see the
china australia trading relationship
continue
but we also are exploring new markets
for our goods and providing the support
to our exporters
to diversify just finally i know you
need to go but
a really important issue has happened
today the victorian ombudsman has found
that the public housing lockdown
breached human rights
you were pretty critical of daniel
andrews and his government for the way
that they handled that
second wave have you broken bread uh
have you
kissed and made up what's happened
uh well we haven't kissed uh but we've
certainly had a constructive discussion
uh we sat opposite each other at the at
the lunch
last week with the premiers and the
treasurers and then
in fact uh sat next to each other for uh
part of the flight home
uh from canberra to to melbourne and and
we discussed the importance of um
of the commonwealth and and victoria
working together i'm a
very proud victorian and i don't regret
anything that i said um during the
lockdown and
and certainly um much of the
correspondence coming back to me
uh was from victorians who were deeply
concerned about
not just the economic impact but the the
human impact um
the lockdown was having on them as for
the ombudsman's
uh ombudsman's report i'll let that
speak for itself and
allow the victorian government to
respond thank you so much for your time
treasurer
good to be with you josh fraudenberg the
treasurer there well for labor's
response to today's my
phone numbers i'm joined by shadow
treasurer jim chalmers jim chambers
welcome
thanks very much patricia do you give
the government any credit for what
looks now like a much faster than
expected recovery
i think the credit belongs to the
australian people who did what was
necessary to limit the spread of the
virus
and in doing so led to some of these
improvements in the
numbers today in the budget update those
improvements are welcome
but they don't tell the full story we do
need a bit of perspective on what's been
released today they're still almost a
million unemployed
more than a million underemployed
another ninety thousand expected to lose
their job between now and march
a week wages growth there's a whole list
of issues
even in today's budget update which
should concern us and which should be
the focus of the government
does labor believe the job keeper should
be extended given
hundreds of thousands of australians
have come off in the last few months
well i mean first of all it's a good
thing that jobkeeper has helped
hundreds of thousands of australians
maintain their connection to their
employer that's why we suggested it in
the first place
that's why we welcome the government's
change of heart when they implement it
that's a good thing
they've been too many exclusions from
job keeper and we've talked about those
previously
the future of job keepers should be
determined by the trajectory of the
economy that's what
we've been saying for some time we've
been very consistent and what the
government has said today in their own
budget papers is that they now expect
unemployment to peak
later in march rather than in december i
think that the government should be
taking that into account
when they determine the future of job
keeper and not to be pig-headed about it
and have a sort of an arbitrary cut off
if the economy and the labor market's
weaker than they anticipated then they
should be
have the flexibility to contemplate
doing it for longer what specific
additional support do you want for
people who are unemployed and
under underemployed well first of all
maintaining that flexibility around job
keeper is important
i think giving people who are on job
seeker
a sense of the the future of the job
payment so that people don't spend
christmas worried about how they'll
live on forty dollars a day if that's
the rate it returns to in march
i think those are pretty clear and
obvious
uh issues that the government hasn't
properly dealt with
beyond that there's a whole range of
things in the economy which the
government could be contemplating first
of all
don't cut wages with your industrial
relations legislation don't cut
retirement incomes
via super like you were just talking
with the treasurer about a moment ago
when he wouldn't rule
out those cuts so as the range of things
the government should be contemplating i
think today was really a missed
opportunity
the government was so keen to pat
themselves on the back for a higher than
expected iron ore price or the reopening
of state economies
that they forgot to do the most
important thing which is to recognize as
a couple of million australians